Let me start talking.
This is Nick.
We're in the book room of Erwin T. Holtzman in Post Point Farms.
Is that where we are?
Michigan.
Let's test this.
It's 3 August 1991.
Okay, Toby.
Give me a little tour.
How come there's only one chair in here?
Because I consider it a book room, and the only person that's going to work in this room is me.
I'm not interested in a chair to read or to have people come and sit and talk or read.
It's a workroom.
Why is it that outsiders, so to speak, even members of your family, it seems, why is it that you don't want to educate in this room or even convert?
Because we have another room, which we call the home library.
Okay.
which you showed me earlier.
And quite symbolically, you're the only person who can sit in that chair.
Is that correct?
Once in a while, if you want to, I'll let you know.
Oh, that's okay.
Imagine that you're the proprietor.
Okay.
But then you have all of the troubles.
But there's something symbolic about that, isn't there?
I prefer to think of it as a genuine work room.
I try to work here.
I set my exhibits up here, and I relate...
to my collections here.
The other room that I showed you over the garage, I relate to library work and placement of collections.
But this one is actually where I work with the books as they come and try to shelve them before I run out of faith.
And what essentially do we have in this room?
The first thing we have is a combination of bookcases, files, and exhibits.
And I did not make it the old-fashioned way with the lock cases.
It's a simple system of glass that slides.
The idea of book exhibits is always a continual challenge for me anyway, because as I've told you before, I'm interested in getting more people into libraries and having more interesting exhibits.
So I play with the idea of having more colorful and multimedia-type exhibits.
Right now it's set up for the great Soviet writer Isaac Babel, who was killed by Stalin in 1940.
Because of my connections in the Soviet Union, I have things like the new edition of the collected memoirs of people who knew Babel, put out by the editor, his widow, and it's an inscription from the widow to me, and she's awaiting me in Moscow in September.
You said before we went on tape that this is the finest Babel collection anyone is likely to see.
What I really said was, as far as Nick Bassbanks is concerned, I don't think you're going to see because of your other activity.
I don't think you'll see another one.
Like this was my comment.
Okay, what distinguishes the collection of Babel from others that I'm... Number one, well, number one, I seem to be the only individual working on Babel in the West that is not either an academic or a member of the family.
Number two, the institutions have sort of given up trying to collect Babel because it's getting very, very difficult.
What I'm looking at in this room
Is this what ultimately will be going to Jerusalem?
What you're seeing from here, what's going to be the beginning of the archives of Israeli...
writers in Jerusalem.
There's about 2,500 books there.
Okay, one, two, three, four, you showed me five bookcases of tin air glitter, tin shells, one, two, three, four.
You're talking about actually 2,500.
Okay.
Because the books are insanely small at the beginning of the early period.
Very few of them, with the exception of the translated works in English, start getting bigger.
So you're talking about
It used to be 10 to the foot.
With the Israeli, it tends to be 15 to the foot.
Tell me, when did you begin forming this collection, and when, and also as a corollary to that question, when did you devise the idea of presenting such a collection to the state of Israel?
Pointing into that, I can tell you that this is divided into Arabic, and then translations from, this is Yiddish,
and then translations from.
And now we break it down into anthologies, and then we start with the individual authors on this shelf here.
And, of course, there's some confusion.
Sometimes there's an author, two authors of the same book, and I might get two copies, etc.
Let me just follow up on something at this point.
The thrust here, when we talk about collecting, so many people think about rearing
We are not looking at books that by themselves individually are necessarily rare.
Is that correct?
But what we're looking at is a possibly unique collection that is more valuable as an entity than it is by individual items.
I think I've told you a couple times that the definition of a collector, of a collection, is that the collection is
More than the sum of the parts.
The word for that is synergistic.
Good.
That's Bucky Fuller that I showed you.
Yeah.
All right.
Back to the question.
So you would say a true collection is synergistic, is that correct?
Did you use that word?
No, Bucky would use that word.
Not me.
Okay.
That's his word.
You're a lovely word.
Greater than the sum of its parts.
All right.
Let's get into rarity.
Okay.
It was on a scale from one to a hundred.
Some of these are insanely...
prayer some of these are taken at my request from authors from their own parents because they themselves don't even have a copy from an example you have asked the author you have approached the author is that right some of them instantly where to go to find this item and please tell me what this book is
This is M. Guri, who was just quoted as a poet and a fiction writer.
He was just quoted, I believe, last month in one of the articles in the New York Times about the current events in Israel.
This is his first book, Flames of Fire.
So we're talking about a year after.
We're talking about less than a year, probably.
We're talking about the absolute infancy of the state, right?
We're talking about the very first classic works of Israeli literature.
Would this be their Gutenberg Bible, so to speak?
No, because their books have received it.
So there is a Libia Larissimus that even precedes this, is that correct?
Well, I've been trying to establish the first book published in the State of Israel, because after that, before that, they said Land of Israel, or Eretz Palestine.
After May 15, 1948, they said State of Israel.
And what does this say on a copyright page?
Does this say where it was published?
Well, this is 1949, so I'm embarrassed to tell you that it doesn't say State of Israel, and it doesn't say not State of Israel in English.
It may say it in Hebrew.
But I know this for a fact, that you can establish either by date or by statement, whether it's pre-state or state.
And I am trying to start with the state, and some of the writers and books overlap.
This is inscribed, you'll have to believe me, in Hebrew to his parents.
So that is really the most important association.
I doubt if he went and did another one because he can't find one of these himself now.
But in any case.
To do it again and find it again.
The reason that I was successful in doing this is that this is a transitory proposition.
That this is in transit.
to the archives of Israeli literature in Jerusalem.
You understand?
He will see this book.
He understood that you are a gatherer.
Absolutely.
I'm not a hunter.
That's important, isn't it?
Everybody is either a gatherer or a hunter in the early days.
Then they became a plumber.
You are a hunter, though.
But I'm a gatherer.
All right.
It's not one on the scale of one to a hundred.
It's getting there.
Well, let's sign a number.
Now, let's go to a hundred.
I can't.
Let's go to a hundred.
A hundred would be... A hundred being the highest or the lowest?
A hundred would be a reprint in paper of a new novel.
Let's not even waste our time with a hundred.
What I'm talking about is that here's David Grossman's Sea Under Love, an absolutely brilliant novel that came out two years ago.
Which I have.
And I have...
the proof copy.
I have the American.
I have the English.
I have this reprint.
So this is close.
This is after 50.
The original works in the original language are 1 to 50.
And then I would say that the translations are 50 to 100 on a scale of 1 to 100.
One being the most rarest, right?
Yeah.
Well, I would say... Well, the problem is that the shelves that we're looking at now and talking about don't include the...
the corrected typescript is submitted to the publisher that I showed you upstairs.
They're in the vault.
Yeah, well, that's not a one even.
His original Holocaust notes would be one.
Holographs.
So you understand?
But what I'm telling you, in printed matter, there always is a precedent, and you know what that is.
What's fun is this.
And I will even do this.
Here.
Saturday Review Press.
Took it from McCall.
So you went up to the fellow, you knew him, or you introduced yourself to him?
In his apartment, I asked him for, number one, a checklist of his work in Hebrew and a checklist of his work in English.
Does he have one?
His wife had the beginnings of one.
Some of the writers don't.
Some of them, they don't even know what they're.
You understand how this works?
Then I got into the fact that I'd like to have signed copies of all his books.
He didn't know where he was going to give them to me.
He'd love to give me the books.
He doesn't have them.
And I said, what's your first book, Flames of Fire?
And I said, do you have one?
He says, no, but I'll get you one from my parents.
And I said, that's lovely.
And this type of story has replicated itself.
Yeah, this is Yehud Amakai.
The first book is privately printed.
His wife has his copy from the first divorce.
And this is a copy of his second book.
I don't have a copy of his first book yet.
But here we go.
This is the second binding of the second book.
It's not the first binding.
So here we go.
And it's much harder for me as a collector of American literature reading English to collect books in Hebrew.
Much, much harder.
It's very hard.
So what's his name again?
His name is Yehuda Amichai.
He's the leading poet.
Yehuda.
Y-E-H-U-D-A-A-M-I-H-A-I.
C-H-A-I.
Yehuda Anakai.
It's not done properly.
We don't get the last name.
Let's get that.
That was the book we were looking at up today.
Yehuda, A-M-I-C-H-A-I.
He is considered one of the leading poets in the world, as well as the leading poet in the state of history.
It's not of this time, not of this place.
I understand, but that's a subsidiary.
Yeah.
All right.
Getting closer to 100 on the scale, we have periodicals of which his material appears.
And sometimes, as you know, you can reflect to yourself that it may be the only appearance.
And here we are.
Here's an Isaac Babel that I don't even remember being in here.
And I'm working on Babel, and I'm standing with you.
You see how this works?
I'd place that higher than 100, frankly, wouldn't you?
No, 100 is the top, or the bottom.
That's what I'm saying.
I would make it higher up the scale, closer to the... I would put it at the bottom.
Why are you leaving it out?
Because I want to work on it with Babel.
You've forgotten about that, in other words.
I didn't know it was in there.
Okay, here's a writer called John Canio.
He's a major writer, and he's done a lot of things with Athenaeum.
I just found this, and I didn't get a chance to discuss it with him.
But believe it or not, this is a book not about him, but it's illustrated by him, because he was a painter at one time in his career.
Here we go.
The more you do not look at books in your collection, it's at your paragraph.
And the more every time you open a book, you will find something.
Tell me when we're having breakfast this morning.
You come home and you stare at your books.
Physically, I will take maybe that and remember that I have four variant bindings of this.
I'm looking at it.
I have three variant bindings of this.
These are colored.
You have to remind yourself what you have.
I also, once in a while, have to remind myself that I don't need the English that I'm resurrected.
I have it.
Got him resurrected.
Right.
The American proofs of C under love.
How am I going to remember that if I'm not reacquainted with it once more?
That's C-S-E-E.
Born, love.
The last time David was in that area, I picked him up at the airport and showed him around.
Such a, such a, such a claim.
the books.
And now, several years ago, I decided it was foolish for me, as the conductor, to have them signed to me.
So I'm having them signed.
OK, I'll just see.
David Grossman has inscribed in this book, facing the title page, for the Israel National Library collection, David Grossman.
Note that copy lacks the Hebrew letters in the last part.
the encyclopedia.
He's calling attention to the proofs, uncorrected proofs, lack some material that then comes out in the book.
Okay, so that's really wonderful then.
I mean, that's nice.
Of course.
As a collector, how does that fit you in Kiblet's or something like that?
It's between the eyes.
You like it?
Well, the reason I admire it is because a lot of the writers, as you know, have a love-hate relationship with their published work.
A lot of the writers have an understanding, and I've tried to explain that to the Israelis and Russians, that they shouldn't, after the birth, they shouldn't step away.
They should be part of the whole process, get into the bookstores, get with the collectors, get with the... He's a young guy, and he appreciates.
David Grossman is the first of the younger bunch of writers that had enough brains
career-wide, to try to contact me before we even met.
He inscribed a book of his to me, and it was handed to me at the bookseller that I buy my new books from in Tel Aviv one year.
I said, who the hell is David Grossman?
But he made contact with me before I made contact with him.
Think of it.
And he's very successful, as you know.
He did publicity, and he's a wonderful guy.
His book, A Yellow Wind,
was about the Palestinians.
You understand that you're looking at a guy who has the original material.
Have you gotten any... My technique is that they sign for the... The convention, the custom.
It's in Hebrew, they sign in Hebrew.
It's in Hebrew, also at the proper place in the book, which is the back of the book, for Hebrew.
By the way, I hate it.
when they sign on the title page, even though it makes a nice exhibit item, I really believe it violates the book.
And I like to, in the first blank, my thinking is, and this is what I try to do, is to get them always to sign at the first possible blank.
Have you always done this?
They naturally go to the, they gravitate to the title page.
But I feel that that's not right, that somehow
Somehow the authentic first edition of this book should be as it appeared in the store and not augmented.
I think the augmentation could be here even.
But even then, I prefer it on the first one.
It's more respect for the book as opposed to what I think should be done.
So you still didn't answer the question when this idea developed that you would make a presentation to Israel.
Along the way, this is a file for promotional purposes and marketing of Xerox material in English that the Institute for the Translation of Hebrew Literature, whose job it is, puts out in Tel Aviv.
And because of my interest in Israeli literature,
I get materials that may or may not ever be published.
And then this material again and again and again goes to some central place.
And that is the point.
Where should that be?
My home is obviously not proper to be the place.
In Israel.
Now let me just read.
This is literature of Israel.
And that's in a folder.
But I have reams of this material, Xerox material.
some of which comes out, you know, printed in published books, and some doesn't.
You know, the writers are lucky if they are accepted, and the ones who aren't exist like this.
To me, this is the same thing, you understand?
It's printed matter.
Well, it's not published matter, though.
There's a difference between, yeah, print matter.
It's written matter, I wouldn't necessarily say.
I'm a collector of printed matter, but I do go to the holographs and here we go again.
Basically, I'm a collector of printed matter.
I don't care if it's published.
I love it better when it's not published.
Because it means it's even better and scarcer and indicative of some kind of a conclusion that somebody made economically that it wasn't worth publishing.
That doesn't mean it was.
Editorially, perhaps, too.
But you understand now that in my Israeli collection, the idea that I can get some of this material ahead of them, even though it's Xerox, means that I can talk about material and authors ahead of publication, and I consider this part of my challenge.
In other words, I'm pre-dating and then I'm post-dating.
Together, the Soviet stuff starts over here.
We're not through with the Israelis.
About one to a hundred.
This is an excellent writer by the name of Vir Resulteer, who comes together with an artist.
He's 25.
See, this is the same as this.
I'm not really a collector of illustrated material.
I have trouble with art and printed matter.
But I do respect the idea that every once in a while something comes out sort of neat.
And I'm able to get copy 10 at 25.
There's very little published in English, although he's a major.
What I really like about this is the idea that it's dual-english.
And what I do is I include this item in my checklist.
It's in English.
He has no other book that I can put in the checklist.
What is that?
He's not, he's been in anthologies, but he doesn't have a separate book of his own.
Tell me why some poets are published in someone else.
He presents his appearance in my checklist, which presents him to the world and comes from the one of 25, whatever that means.
And I consider this in the way my mind works, in the way the operation works.
Now, not too many collections, not too much oral stuff, although as you know, there's more and more books, you know, listening.
But I have some record material, you know, poets reading, et cetera, et cetera.
And then I also have some adaptations and some film material.
I also have some pictures.
Besides the books themselves, I have ancillary material.
You saw my Faulkner collection.
It's the same thing in the Israelis.
And I also have clipping and criticism.
And I also have complete runs of literary magazines up in the attic.
Those are Hebrew, in Hebrew, complete runs of now out-of-business literary journals.
The librarians in the National Library have told me for 20 years now
that they don't need that because they already have it.
And I keep telling them, I want it all together in one room.
And I don't want running from one place to the other.
And this is a separate thing.
It's like the Faulkner's that I have.
The University of Michigan has a lot of those Faulkner's.
But that doesn't mean that I'm interested in them and they just need it together.
We don't have to go through all 2,500 titles either, by the way.
Well, what's interesting is the Arabic.
I used to buy it for 40 cents, and I've lost my contacts.
And it turns out that a lot of these poetry, little, tiny, little staple poetry collections, is now considered PLO material.
And we'll talk about politics of literature and literature politics.
I think you'll find that an awful lot of my Arab material is very, very...
very interesting to political studies, even though it's literature.
Why do you admit it to the Israeli collection if it's Arabic and Palestinian?
Because the so-called Palestinians were under military occupation at this time for an indefinite period.
Why do you say so-called Palestinians?
Palestine was changed.
into two states.
The Arabic state was still born by their neighbors.
They did not respect it.
They now want what they were offered in 1947 and refused.
It's a little late.
It's not a little late.
It's too late.
It's my belief that the people who consider themselves Palestinians
fighting an Israeli state.
This military occupation is very abhorrent to me because all wars should result in pieces, and I don't understand it.
Therefore, this stuff was produced by these people in that territory, whatever the name of it is.
We're talking about Bethlehem, Nazareth, but a lot of it comes out of Haifa.
So you have it both ways.
And the key element is post-1948.
The key element that was produced by people who lived in that place and was published in that place.
Post-1948.
Which is Israel's place, right?
I understand that now.
Good.
The renewal now is the people who didn't live there, coming from Moscow and Kiev, some of them are now, are they Soviet or are they Israeli?
So I'm actually between my own designations and my classifications and my collections, nothing like that one.
Okay.
Tell me now when, I want a basic question, when did you come?
1973, after the death of my parents, who went to Israel quite a bit.
but they wanted to.
I attended the Jerusalem Book Fair in 73, after every year since.
In 73, I began to go into bookstores.
They have a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful confusion in quantity and quality of bookstores.
New.
To use books is a different problem.
They don't have the concept of modern first edition.
I've been telling them about it.
I like people who collect
Modern First Editions, but they don't even make the standards.
They also don't have the shops of antiquarian Modern First Editions.
So you really have to work.
It's not London or New York.
If you go into a new bookstore, the First Editions sell out very, very fast of the good books because the opinions are very small.
The publishers are very conservative.
I'm a size.
40,000 is nothing over there, and they still go.
four times ten.
You have to be on top of the situation.
Again, getting the antiquarian and going back to 48, 49, 50.
I have a couple of dealers who want some dealers to pay for the price.
You're straight from the question, though.
With your parents, you were over there in 73 for the first time.
Oh, I began to realize in 73 because seeing all the bookstores and also seeing how hard it was to get the antiquarian.
I still reminded myself that going back to 48 is possible, and that I basically, as a book collector, even though I don't read Hebrew, I basically can go and become a great collector.
And I started right then.
And I saw a couple writers, and I started buying the new printings.
Okay, key question.
This was in 73?
73.
You were collecting what at that time?
At that time, I was working on my Faulkner, and I was working on what I call Russian literature and English.
At that time, I wasn't as tough on Soviet.
What about your 300 American authors?
I also was working on 300 American authors all the way from Mailer to Scott Fitzgerald.
And as wonderful a collection as that sounds, and I do want to go back and talk about that at some point, you probably realize that you could not be a great collector
by those books or those authors alone.
Is that probably true?
What you said... No.
To use your phrase, you saw the opportunity to be a great collector.
What it really meant, to extend the borders past the United States, my country.
However... In other words, I would say a great international collector as opposed to... I think what I'm driving at is maybe he saw the opportunity to achieve a different level.
as a collector that you really couldn't do with the 300-odd offers that you were doing that you were collecting back here.
I was a little disillusioned with the quality of American literature at that time and what was happening, and also the sign limits and all that procedure.
However, but nevertheless, I was looking for something else.
Well, you said it in the front of it.
Were you striving for a— Wait, did you— Well, I jumped across the Atlantic.
I jumped across the Atlantic.
Did you see this as an opportunity to achieve greatness as a collector, I guess?
That's why I'm waiting to sit down the right place.
Pretty hard.
Here we go again.
Brandeis, Harvard, et cetera, et cetera.
They're librarians.
We're working on this, but not to the extent that they shouldn't have done it.
And I saw an opportunity to be, like, jump ahead.
Was this also about the time where you decided to divest yourself of your American books?
Okay, so you started, however, at that point.
You started acquiring, gathering, building.
Building is perhaps the right word.
Building this collection.
Are you obsessed with it?
Yeah, especially when I found that this is probably the first book of serious literature published in the New States.
And you're now holding what?
I'm holding Nathan Shaham.
Natham.
N-A-T-H-A-N.
Shaham.
S-H-A-H-A-M.
First book, short stories.
Which you're holding right now.
Which he thinks was done in the spring of 1948.
There it is, 1948.
And it says State of Israel.
And it says State of Israel on a copyright page.
The crucial date is May 15th.
I have not been able to or get anybody to cooperate with me in trying to see what books came out in that week.
You're already refining it now, aren't you?
Well, how do you say this is the first book?
It's very interesting.
The man is still publishing today.
He didn't give me the title, by the way.
He translates as Crops...
And metal.
There's what in metal?
Crops.
C-R-O-P-S.
What is that word?
Agricultural crops.
Oh, crops.
I'm sorry.
Crops and metal.
Yeah.
I don't know.
These are stories?
Yeah.
The man is still writing today.
These are stories.
Yeah.
The man is still writing today, and his new book is coming out next month from Grove Weidenfeld, a novel.
Hmm.
So what?
We span May 6th, 1948, and here we are, 1991.
Another book's coming out in English.
It actually encompasses the whole... At one time, he was cultural council in New York.
He's been to my home many times.
This is the first book.
I have not been able to find one because I'm using his judgment that he remembers the spring of 1948.
If it had been before...
The spring of 48, it would have been called Land of Palestine.
If you want to, I'll show you the one that says Land of Palestine.
They say he's been here.
You bring these people over as part of a cultural... No, these people travel under various paths, but also sponsoring their own books.
And in the early years, I used to take care of them and pick them up at airports, and they would stay with me, and I would feed them and things like that.
I don't do as much of that as I do anymore.
I told you David Grossman was here, no?
You're kind of an activist collector, aren't you?
No, I'm a fanatic.
I mean, it's in the book.
It's the creator of the town, and not the creative.
You collect writers as much as you do Shirley Holsten says that I really should have them watch.
The Combs in Rome?
Have you seen that with the people who are on the shelves?
So that's an accurate assessment thing.
You do collect writers.
Yes.
The collection in Jerusalem will be called the Archives of Israeli Writers, as opposed to the Archives of Israeli Literature.
I suggested Archives of Israeli Literature.
They suggested Archives of Israeli Writers, and I said, fine.
There is a distinction.
Why did they make that suggestion?
I'm surprised you didn't.
I'm not sure why.
That sounds like something you should have suggested.
I can't recapitulate it.
Sorry.
When do you expect to present this?
When the room is in with the bookcases.
Is that in progress?
Is that in a way?
Five of the cases.
Case four and five are being built.
And my main obstacle...
remain, not in physically transferring them from my shelf to these cases, but trying to establish some kind of form of procedures on what to do with them and how to use them.
My cataloging I'm showing you now is a little bit primitive.
I have two of these.
How many cards in that drawer?
Yeah, 1,300?
Couldn't tell you.
1,500?
I don't know.
I used to know.
Okay.
Sometimes in the early days... About 14 inches.
In the early days, I would have somebody come in with a Hebrew typewriter.
Now, I do them all by hand, and I don't know what I'm doing.
Your card cataloging is different than this.
I'm going to insist that the card cataloging is a combination of theirs and mine.
as I described with the architectural.
It's even more complicated when you get into this.
I don't like it when I come to a book in Russian or a book in Hebrew, where nothing in the book, the old-fashioned publishers continue to publish nothing in the book in English.
The more modern publishers have universal translations and then something in English that I can relate to.
But I resent it with the idea that I am not interested
You know, the poor Christian Macaroni, Israeli writers, just because I don't read Hebrew.
I resent the fact that I'm not supposed to look at a card catalog card.
The public library is bobbing to me.
And I said to the man, it doesn't have something in English.
I said, well, if it was in that language, why bother?
I mean, maybe there's a reason.
If it's original, then you can't read the book, right?
Oh, idea of a card is to assist the reader.
Let's see your point.
I go past readership.
I'm not going to read the book, but I'm going to understand the book maybe better than the reader.
And I will read it in translation, hopefully someday.
I want access to that card.
I want to make that card.
Oh, I am.
Okay, let's go.
It's called transliteration.
You asked me how I handled it.
I did.
Let's move to the Soviet.
Let's talk about how that developed from the Israeli.
In 1958 we were there for a week and I didn't get the understanding that I should be moving.
You were there being the Soviet Union?
Yeah.
Dr. Zhivago, but I didn't know enough to go and visit him.
Pasternak.
He died in 60.
Do you regret that to this day?
Okay.
I know his family.
And I visit his family.
And I've been, every trip I go to the Dasha that he lived in, Peridelfina.
And they're making the shrine out of it in the museum and stuff like that.
And we had the opening last year.
As a precious, as a precious to the Russian Soviets.
Name it for me.
Name the collection.
Give me what you're saying.
Five, great.
Nineteenth-century Christian novelist.
First works in English.
This is my beginning of the Soviet.
I have Gogol, First Gen S.C.S.P.
Sergainis.
The First War and Peace in English.
I have the First Antichristian in English.
You have three sets.
No.
The first set was done.
I found a paper set, which is very, very rare.
The paper set then advertises it's available in cloth.
The cloth set doesn't say anything about that it's available in paper.
Very interesting.
Publish it in English.
It's British?
That's fine.
I see it.
It's American.
Okay.
Yeah.
Some of the first—these are first printings in English.
I don't care whether they were done in England or in America.
I understand, yeah.
I was a little surprised it was done in America before.
Oh, that's right.
You won't believe this one.
It was in St.
Petersburg, 1893.
Count Tolstoy.
Record show.
Only Yale and what's... New York Public Library.
New York Public Library.
The only other copy.
Is what?
Copy three.
The title for my thing is...
The Caucasian, C-A-U-C-A-S-I-A-N, captive, a true story about Count Tolstoy, T-O-L-S-T-O-Y.
In English.
Printed where?
In St.
Petersburg.
New York Public Library in Yale.
And Holtzman.
I went to New York Public Library, and they brought their copy out.
And there was two out of three together, and I compared them.
Where did you get that?
Peter Howard found it.
Most academics of Slavic literature don't pay any attention to anything than the work in the original language.
Toby Holtz and a few other people are respecting works and translations.
The earliest translations are the best, not quality-wise, but the fact that they're the first time
that the English-speaking world, to even know that such a thing exists, gets access to it.
And I love the introduction.
I used to spend a pound in London in the 50s.
Now these books are getting very, very expensive, and I don't buy them at the expensive prices.
The five again are Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Turgenev, Pushkin,
And Gogol, G-O-G-O-L.
I was 19 years old, writing from scratch.
What would I collect?
I have told myself over the years that I probably would collect those English translations of great works, right?
That's an interesting collection.
Clearly, somebody must do this, though.
I'll bet you Harvard does it.
I'll bet you they just don't know it.
I'll bet they haven't.
It's a cross-collect.
Yeah.
OK.
This is the key book.
It's available in the reprint.
It's absolutely marvelous.
It's to 1900.
That's a nice book.
Excuse me.
Let me just write down this.
It's sublime.
That's the reference I'm going to look for.
Yeah.
Absolutely sublime.
I can't.
I'm going to sit down.
I can't sit down on that.
Here's how you're going to buy it.
It's available through Bancroft.
First, because I said bibliographically, I need this book.
It's available through Fulcret.
Magic moments being right now, you're saying the first time.
It was the first translation of 1777.
It's Aeschylus, A-E-S-C-H-Y-L-U-S.
You'd like to sort it.
You'd probably like to take that book and get all the... I have seen two or three catalogs in the last few years offering classics and translations.
Not the first ten things.
I'm just talking basically.
You don't think.
So again, there's a higher form.
Here's what I do.
Look at the Talmud.
You talk about incredible.
That's a pretty interesting book.
It changed my life.
I make a checklist, see?
I own the... And I edit things, and then I stop it, because there's another one that carries on.
But you understand there's no publisher.
I've got another one with a publisher.
I'm just telling you, Harris.
First English translation, think of it.
The first time in the world.
Dante's Inferno.
Great book.
Hmm?
You understand that the first ones are not only incomplete, but poor.
But it doesn't matter.
To me, it's the point in time that counts.
It has been said that Dante is the most influential poet on English writers writing in another language.
Did you know that?
Yes, but you understand there's two kinds of English poets.
The ones that could read them in the Italian and the ones that had to wait until 1802 to read them in English.
Blake went and learned Italian.
Well, that's unfair.
So he could read Dante in the original so he could do his illustrations.
The great American critic, Edmund Wolfman, learned Hebrew in order to write a book on the Dead Sea Scrolls.
He learned Russian in order to write a book about Holtzman.
You're talking about critics who were a little bit curiously.
What's the difference?
Toby Holtzman continues to think that he might have gone in this direction.
Well, what happens when you empty these shelves and send them off to Jerusalem?
What are you going to put in there?
The second copies that are in the attic, remember that?
Okay, now we get into the classic.
I want to talk about the Soviet definition.
In 1917, the Tsarist period ended, and it was then the Union of Soviet Social Republic.
And Soviet means council.
we called the people they're Soviets as opposed to Russians.
When Joseph Brodsky left in 1972, he became a Russian writer.
While he was in the Soviet Union, he was very scarcely published, but he was a Soviet writer.
That's the distinction that some of us make between the Russians.
Again, it's very hard to distinguish who's a Soviet writer as opposed to who's a Russian writer.
Soviets now accept the fact that the emigres
are welcome back and are under the old Russian literature.
Years ago, he didn't like the word Russian literature at all, he wanted to call it Soviet literature.
So here we go.
What the hell is the name of this collection?
And it's interesting, I still call it Soviet literature.
Okay, what are you collecting it for?
Does this have a destination?
If in this country it's possible at Stanford University, because of my thoughts in terms of the Israeli National Library, they also have expressed great interest in it.
So you're looking for a home, a good home?
Well, I would consider a good home.
I'm not ready to make the divestiture because, in order, I worked for several years on the Faulkner and I'm now working on the Israeli.
I prefer to think that I've got to do it or not.
How long did you work on the Faulkner?
Before divestiture?
I started with the first book was The Portable Falcon, which came out in 1946.
The Soviet started with, and it continues to be the biggest collection as well as the most valuable collection, Pasternak as an individual Soviet writer.
So you're looking here at Boris Pasternak, one of the better collections in the West.
And I've been told it's much better than Harvard, much better than Stanford, and much better than a combination of Harvard and Stanford and Yale.
How many titles on Pasternak, roughly?
Well, there's roughly 50 on a thing here.
So you've got 50, 50, 50, 50, 50, 50.
There's other stuff, and I have other stuff upstairs.
And I have materials that I haven't even... Anything inscribed by Pasternak here?
Yeah.
I have about two books inscribed by Pasternak.
And I have some original material here that I haven't even gotten into yet.
Okay.
Can we go sit and talk now someplace?
Is there anything else here I have to see?
I should see.
One of the things that I always did is separate the living writers and the ones who die.
When I started on Israeli literature in 1973, everybody was alive.
of time, one by each, they get separated when they die.
As soon as I find out about it, they are taken from here and elevated.
It starts with A, right here, starting with Agna.
And these are the ones who passed away.
This is Don Benemot, my friend, that I told you about.
Why is it important to separate the living from the dead?
For instance, know that this is, I better see this guy, and it's
too late worrying about that guy.
Again, by staring at him physically.
When you say seeing them, you mean seeking them out, making their acquaintance.
Communicating.
I also feel that when I show somebody and they say, oh, I'm next to somebody and I'm next to somebody, they're not next to somebody who's passed on.
In other words,
In the culture, they exist alive and dead.
I have a big thing about life and death.
That is one of the great novels.
It may be one of the three great novels of Soviet literature.
Not to be published during his lifetime.
V-A-S-I-L-Y, Grossman, V-O-S-S-N-E, and Life, Ampersand, and Fate.
In Tel Aviv, in May, seeking out Israeli literature, this insanely rare little thing, in Hebrew, printed in Israel, pre-state printed in Tel Aviv, Vasily Grossman's account of the first time that he found a concentration camp.
Stalin, Lett, Grossman, and Ehrenberg, the creative reporters, to show the world how bad the fascists were.
And they entered the camp, the West about the camp, and the West didn't pay any attention to enter a camp and write about it.
And it came out in this little format.
Great writer.
Again and again and again, with the exception of Pasternak and Isaac Babel, my Soviet literature is more memorable, finest condition possible of
Works in English.
Translation.
Book defined looking like that.
Tillyak happens to be one of the great writers.
But I'm talking about fine copy.
Very small printing of all of these guys.
You care about condition then, of course, as all... Condition isn't everything.
It's the only thing.
Like since Lombardi.
Modern.
Book.
Collection.
If you're going to go and collect Dante in the 17th century, the condition then becomes also relative.
I tend to accept in the Russian a condition.
I'm really not collecting these books except Pasternak and Babel, but I will accept this because of being a few rubles.
I will accept this.
And that's the only thing that's coming out now.
The fine condition hasn't come out yet because the prices haven't come high enough.
I accept that, and I accept that in the Israeli also.
Interesting.
But I won't accept it in the translation.
I won't accept it.
But I tend to accept it less than mint in the original language.
That's the way I operate.
I don't know what the standards are.
I don't know what the game is.
Well, so you get one, and if you can get better, then you do that too, right?
Yeah.
...in Rostov on the... in Vesneskaya.
...contacts with a good literature, Joseph Becain.
...and the Nobel Prize I made in his honor and distributed a... ...a checklist of his work and gave him something.
The incorrect is one for me.
New York Public Library, and they showed me an exhibit case of Joseph Whitcase, honoring his, you know, showing some of his works that they have.
I have more than that, and I said, of course you do.
That's valid me a lot.
Public division in the New York Public Library.
I'm having a complete question.
The libraries defend on people like you.
I'll be frank with you.
The physicians' people.
From the Slavic Division on down.
That's what I am.
Arrest to you.
To which I say, phooey.
I'm glad you didn't catch that, but I mean, to which I say, phooey.
I mean, I don't understand how that's going to influence me.
And I think that Joseph is a force of me.
Right now, he's a force of us.
I don't care about this arrest to you.
When I offered my Faulkner to the New York Public Library, you offered it to New York Public Library?
Yeah.
The Varian was in Spain, and this girl says, he goes to Lola.
Lola's flat.
And everybody's talking to the wall.
That's how uncommon we have.